# __1.3 Given a scenario, analyze potential indicators associated with application attacks__

# Privilege escalation

Privilege escalation is a common way for attackers to gain unauthorized access to systems within a security perimeter.

Attackers start by finding weak points in an organization’s defenses and gaining access to a system. In many cases that first point of penetration will not grant attackers with the level of access or data they need. They will then attempt privilege escalation to gain more permissions or obtain access to additional, more sensitive systems.

In some cases, attackers attempting privilege escalation find the "doors are wide open" - inadequate security controls, or failure to follow the principle of least privilege, with users having more privileges than they actually need. In other cases, attackers exploit software vulnerabilities, or use specific techniques to overcome an operating system’s permissions mechanism.

There are two types of privilege escalation:

* __Horizontal privilege escalation__: An attacker expands their privileges by taking over another account and misusing the legitimate privileges granted to the other user.

* __Vertical privilege escalation__: An attacker attempts to gain more permissions or access with an existing account they have compromised. For example, an attacker takes over a regular user account on a network and attempts to gain administrative permissions. This requires more sophistication and may take the shape of an Advanced Persistent Threat.

## Mitigation

* Path quickly: When it comes to OS-level privilege escalation vulnerabilities, it is vital to install security patches as soon as possible, not only for the OS, but for all third-party applications used on the system.

* Update anti-virus/anti-malware software to block known vulnerabilities.

* Data execution prevention: Application whitelisting technologies can be used to restrict which programs may run on a system or limited the areas where data can be executable, enabling organizations to reduce a machine's attack surface. Making sure that unneeded services are turned off and that unused hardware components and drivers are disabled is also very important.

* Address space layout randomisation: Some operative system allow the data to be allocated randomly preventing a buffer overrun at a known memory address.

# Cross-site scripting

Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks are a type of injection, in which malicious scripts are injected into otherwise benign and trusted websites. XSS attacks occur when an attacker uses a web application to send malicious code, generally in the form of a browser side script, to a different end user. Flaws that allow these attacks to succeed are quite widespread and occur anywhere a web application uses input from a user within the output it generates without validating or encoding it.

An attacker can use XSS to send a malicious script to an unsuspecting user. The end user’s browser has no way to know that the script should not be trusted, and will execute the script. Because it thinks the script came from a trusted source, the malicious script can access any cookies, session tokens, or other sensitive information retained by the browser and used with that site. These scripts can even rewrite the content of the HTML page.

## Types of cross-site scripting

### Stored XSS (persistent)

Stored XSS generally occurs when user input is stored on the target server, such as in a database, in a message forum, visitor log, comment field, etc. And then a victim is able to retrieve the stored data from the web application without that data being made safe to render in the browser. With the advent of HTML5, and other browser technologies, we can envision the attack payload being permanently stored in the victim’s browser, such as an HTML5 database, and never being sent to the server at all.

### Reflected XSS (non-persistent)

Reflected XSS occurs when user input is immediately returned by a web application in an error message, search result, or any other response that includes some or all of the input provided by the user as part of the request, without that data being made safe to render in the browser, and without permanently storing the user provided data. In some cases, the user provided data may never even leave the browser.

### DOM based XSS

 DOM Based XSS is a form of XSS where the entire tainted data flow from source to sink takes place in the browser, i.e., the source of the data is in the DOM, the sink is also in the DOM, and the data flow never leaves the browser. For example, the source (where malicious data is read) could be the URL of the page (e.g., document.location.href), or it could be an element of the HTML, and the sink is a sensitive method call that causes the execution of the malicious data (e.g., document.write).

## Protecting against

From a users perspective some actions or precautions can be taken:

* Be careful when clicking untrusted links.
* Consider disabling Javascript or limit its use.
* Keep your browser and applications updated.

From a developer point of view:

* Train and maintain awareness.
* Do not trust any user input.
* Use escaping/encoding.
* Sanitize HTML.
* Set the HttpOnly flag.
* Use a Content Security Policy.
* Scan regularly.

# Injection attacks

Injection attacks refer to a broad class of attack vectors. In an injection attack, an attacker supplies untrusted input to a program. This input gets processed by an interpreter as part of a command or query. In turn, this alters the execution of that program.

Injections are amongst the oldest and most dangerous attacks aimed at web applications. They can lead to data theft, data loss, loss of data integrity, denial of service, as well as full system compromise. The primary reason for injection vulnerabilities is usually insufficient user input validation.

This attack type is considered a major problem in web security. Injection attacks, particularly SQL Injections (SQLi attacks) and Cross-site Scripting (XSS), are not only very dangerous but also widespread, especially in legacy applications.

What makes injection vulnerabilities particularly scary is that the attack surface is enormous. Furthermore, injection attacks are a very well understood vulnerability class. This means that there are many freely available and reliable tools that allow even inexperienced attackers to abuse these vulnerabilities automatically.

## Types of injection attacks

* Code injection: The attacker injects application code written in the application language. This code may be used to execute operating system commands with the privileges of the user who is running the web application. In advanced cases, the attacker may exploit additional privilege escalation vulnerabilities, which may lead to full web server compromise. Some of the injections named below belong to this category but they deserve to be named independently.

* __CRLF injection__: The attacker injects an unexpected CRLF (Carriage Return and Line Feed) character sequence. This sequence is used to split an HTTP response header and write arbitrary contents to the response body. This attack may be combined with Cross-site Scripting (XSS).

* __Cross-site Scripting (XSS)__: The attacker injects an arbitrary script (usually in JavaScript) into a legitimate website or web application. This script is then executed inside the victim’s browser.

* __Email Header Injection__: This attack is very similar to CRLF injections. The attacker sends IMAP/SMTP commands to a mail server that is not directly available via a web application.

* __Host Header Injection__: The attacker abuses the implicit trust of the HTTP Host header to poison password-reset functionality and web caches.

* __LDAP Injection__: The attacker injects LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) statements to execute arbitrary LDAP commands. They can gain permissions and modify the contents of the LDAP tree.

* __OS Command Injection__: The attacker injects operating system commands with the privileges of the user who is running the web application. In advanced cases, the attacker may exploit additional privilege escalation vulnerabilities, which may lead to full system compromise.

* __SQL Injection (SQLi)__: The attacker injects SQL statements that can read or modify database data. In the case of advanced SQL Injection attacks, the attacker can use SQL commands to write arbitrary files to the server and even execute OS commands. This may lead to full system compromise.

* __XPath injection__: The attacker injects data into an application to execute crafted XPath queries. They can use them to access unauthorized data and bypass authentication.

* __DLL injection__: It is a technique used for running code within the address space of another process by forcing it to load a dynamic-link library DLL injection is often used by external programs to influence the behavior of another program in a way its authors did not anticipate or intend.

* __XML Injection__: It is an attack technique used to manipulate or compromise the logic of an XML application or service. The injection of unintended XML content and/or structures into an XML message can alter the intend logic of the application.

# Buffer overflows

Buffers are memory storage regions that temporarily hold data while it is being transferred from one location to another. A buffer overflow (or buffer overrun) occurs when the volume of data exceeds the storage capacity of the memory buffer. As a result, the program attempting to write the data to the buffer overwrites adjacent memory locations.

Buffer overflows can affect all types of software. They typically result from malformed inputs or failure to allocate enough space for the buffer. If the transaction overwrites executable code, it can cause the program to behave unpredictably and generate incorrect results, memory access errors, or crashes.

## Types of buffer overflow attacks

* __Stack-based buffer overflows__: Stack-based buffer overflows are more common, and leverage stack memory that only exists during the execution time of a function.

* __Heap-based attacks__: Heap-based attacks are harder to carry out and involve flooding the memory space allocated for a program beyond memory used for current runtime operations.

# Replay attacks

A replay attack occurs when a cybercriminal eavesdrops on a secure network communication, intercepts it, and then fraudulently delays or resends it to misdirect the receiver into doing what the hacker wants. The added danger of replay attacks is that a hacker does not even need advanced skills to decrypt a message after capturing it from the network. The attack could be successful simply by resending the whole thing.

## Types of replay attacks

* __Pass-the-hash__: A Pass-the-hash (PtH) attack is a technique whereby an attacker captures a password hash (as opposed to the password characters) and then simply passes it through for authentication and potentially lateral access to other networked systems. The threat actor doesn’t need to decrypt the hash to obtain a plain text password. PtH attacks exploit the authentication protocol, as the passwords hash remains static for every session until the password is rotated. Attackers commonly obtain hashes by scraping a system’s active memory and other techniques.

* __Session replays__: Session replay attacks are network attacks that maliciously that focus on the user's session IDs stored as either a cookie, URL, or form field. This makes possible the *__session hijacking__*. Session hijacking happens when an intruder takes advantage of a compromised active session by hijacking or stealing the HTTP cookies used to maintain a session on most websites. Another way is by predicting an active session to gain unauthorized access to information in a remote webserver without detection as the intruder uses the credentials of the particular user.

# Request forgeries

Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) is an attack that forces an end user to execute unwanted actions on a web application in which they are currently authenticated. With a little help of social engineering (such as sending a link via email or chat), an attacker may trick the users of a web application into executing actions of the attacker’s choosing. If the victim is a normal user, a successful CSRF attack can force the user to perform state changing requests like transferring funds, changing their email address, and so forth. If the victim is an administrative account, CSRF can compromise the entire web application.

Two types of request forgeries: Cross-Site Request Forgery and Server-Side Request Forgery attacks. Both take advantage of how servers process URLs. However, these attacks have very different purposes and impacts.

* __Cross-site request forgery__: The purpose of Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) is to force a user to take undesired actions on their online account. Accomplishing this involves taking advantage of state-changing requests, where a web server will take some action based upon an authenticated user browsing to a particular page.

* __Server-Side Request Forgery__: Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF) attacks are designed to exploit how a server processes external information. Some web applications may be designed to read information from or write information to a particular URL like a REST API. If an attacker can modify the target URL, they can potentially exfiltrate sensitive information from the application or inject untrusted input into it.

  The vulnerabilities associated with SSRF are not limited to data exfiltration. In some cases, applications may be designed to read data from a particular URL. If this URL is trusted, the application may not be performing data validation. This could allow an attacker to provide malicious input that could exploit a buffer overflow, integer overflow, SQL injection or other vulnerability in the application.

# Driver manipulation

Our device drivers have direct access to hardware and the operating system, this is why, they are a great place to put a piece of malicious software that it is installed in our operating systems. These drivers sit between the hardware and the operating system itself. They are effectively privileged code that is running, very much trusted by the operating system. So this would be a great place to embed some malicious software.

## Shimming

Application shimming is a Windows Application Compatibility framework that Windows created to allow programs to run on versions of the OS that they were not initially created to run on. Malware authors have discovered they can write their own shims to get around security like the User Access Control (AUC).

## Refactoring

Refactoring or metamorphic virus is one that can transform based on the ability to translate, edit and rewrite its own code. It is considered the most infectious computer virus, and it can do serious damage to a system if it is not detected quickly. Antivirus scanners have a difficult time detecting this type of virus because it can change its internal structure, rewriting and reprogramming itself each time it infects a computing system. This is different from a polymorphic virus, which encrypts its original code to keep from being detected. Because of their complexity, creating metamorphic viruses requires extensive programming knowledge.

# SSL Stripping

SSL Stripping or an SSL Downgrade Attack is to strip away the encryption offered by HTTPS and, it is a serious cyber threat to many corporations since their employees are constantly on the move and require access to Internet on-the-go even through open non-secure Wi-Fi hotspots. Once attackers gain access to a network, they can act as a Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) to intercept connections over the network. These interception tactics can also be deployed against wired networks, provided that someone gains access to an Ethernet port.

# Race conditions

A race condition or race hazard is the condition of an electronics, software, or other system where the system's substantive behavior is dependent on the sequence or timing of other uncontrollable events. It becomes a bug when one or more of the possible behaviors is undesirable. 

*__Time-of-Check-Time-of-Use__* (TOCTOU) attacks fall under the category of a race condition which, as said, occurs when two or more operations that should be done in sequence are attempted simultaneously. Attackers are able to access a file and make harmful changes between the time of check (first time the program accesses the file) and the time of use (when the software uses the file). The opportunity window is very short due to that near simultaneous overlap.

# Other application attacks

## Memory Vulnerabilities

Manipulating a systems memory can be very advantageous for an attacker but, quite complicated.

### Memory leak

A memory leak is a way of manipulating memory and it is an unintentional form of memory consumption whereby the developer fails to free an allocated block of memory when no longer needed. The consequences of such an issue depend on the application itself. Consider the following general three cases:

* __Short Lived User-land Application__: Little if any noticable effect. Modern operating system recollects lost memory after program termination.
* __Long Lived User-land Application__: Potentially dangerous. These applications continue to waste memory over time, eventually consuming all RAM resources. Leads to abnormal system behavior.
* __Kernel-land Process__: Very dangerous. Memory leaks in the kernel level lead to serious system stability issues. Kernel memory is very limited compared to user land memory and should be handled cautiously.

### Pointer/object dereference

The program can potentially dereference a null pointer, thereby raising a NullPointerException. Null pointer errors are usually the result of one or more programmer assumptions being violated. Most null pointer issues result in general software reliability problems, but if an attacker can intentionally trigger a null pointer dereference, the attacker might be able to use the resulting exception to bypass security logic or to cause the application to reveal debugging information that will be valuable in planning subsequent attacks.

A null-pointer dereference takes place when a pointer with a value of NULL is used as though it pointed to a valid memory area.

Null-pointer dereferences, while common, can generally be found and corrected in a simple way. They will always result in the crash of the process, unless exception handling (on some platforms) is invoked, and even then, little can be done to salvage the process.

## Integer Overflow

An integer overflow is a type of an arithmetic overflow error when the result of an integer operation does not fit within the allocated memory space. Instead of an error in the program, it usually causes the result to be unexpected. Integer overflows have been listed as the number 8 most dangerous software error in the most recent CWE 2019 list, mostly because they often lead to buffer overflows, which are currently the number 1 most dangerous software error according to that list.

## Directory traversal

Directory traversal or Path Traversal is an HTTP attack which allows attackers to access restricted directories and execute commands outside of the web server’s root directory.

Web servers provide two main levels of security mechanisms:

* Access Control Lists (ACLs)
* Root directory

The root directory is a specific directory on the server file system in which the users are confined. Users should not able to access anything above this root but, if not properly configured or vulnerable, attackers can explore the rest of the disc.

## Improper Error Handling

Improper handling of errors can introduce a variety of security problems for a web site. The most common problem is when detailed internal error messages such as stack traces, database dumps, and error codes are displayed to the user (attacker). These messages reveal implementation details that should never be revealed. Such details can provide attackers important clues on potential flaws in the site and such messages are also disturbing to normal users.

## Improper input handling

Improper input handling is the term used to describe functions such as validation, sanitization, filtering, or encoding and/or decoding of input data. Improper Input handling is a leading cause of critical vulnerabilities that exist in today's systems and applications. No input should never be trusted.

## API attacks

An API attack is hostile usage, or attempted hostile usage, of an API. Some of the many ways that attackers can abuse an API endpoint:

### Resource exhaustion

Resource exhaustion attacks are computer security exploits that crash, hang, or otherwise interfere with the targeted program or system.

#### DoS/DDoS Attacks

In a Denial of Service (DoS) or Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack, the attacker attempts to make the targeted system unavailable to its intended users. They have a wide variation of possible scale. At one extreme, "slow" DoS attacks can exhaust the victim’s resources with very little bandwidth. At the opposite extreme, volumetric DDoS assaults can consist of several terabits per second of incoming traffic. When these occur against prominent websites, they can gain a lot of publicity. However, DoS and DDoS attacks are growing in frequency against API endpoints as well.

#### DHCP starvation

A DHCP starvation attack is a malicious digital attack that targets DHCP servers. During a DHCP attack, a hostile actor floods a DHCP server with bogus DISCOVER packets until the DHCP server exhausts its supply of IP addresses. Once that happens, the attacker can deny legitimate network users service, or even supply an alternate DHCP connection that leads to a Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) attack.

#### Zip bomb

It is a relatively small file that when extracted consumes a huge amount of memory.

### Data Exposure

Web applications frequently process and transfer sensitive data: credit card information, passwords, session tokens, private health information, and more. If an application does not handle the data correctly—for example, by not encrypting in transit, or at rest—then it could be compromised.

This is especially a concern for RESTful APIs that use HTTP as the underlying protocol. HTTP includes a number of operations that are potentially vulnerable. An attacker can craft malicious requests, control message mapping, and even manipulate the responses generated by the backend system.

### Parameter Tampering

An attacker attempts to manipulate the parameters exchanged between client and server. The goal is to modify application data, such as user credentials and permissions, price and quantity of products, etc.
